In course of the last two years, I've outlined a number of proposals for Kotlin regarding better type safety for coroutines, resource handling and DSLs, better expressiveness, and a syntactic facelift to reach into areas where Python currently dominates. The proposals are summarised in five short memos of 3-5 pages each.

- [Structured resource management](kotlin_objects.pdf) (4 pages): Like many languages, Kotlin uses scope-based resource management. We outline how to improve resource management in Kotlin, ultimately revealing the common structure underlying structured concurrency in Kotlin and lifetime-based borrow checking in Rust.
- [Controlling purity](kotlin_purity.pdf) (1 page): In many cases, high-order functions such as `sortWith(comparator)` only have meaningful behaviour if their arguments are pure functions. Type-level control over the purity of functions and data is essential to statically prevent nonsensical behaviour and dangerous vulnerabilities.
- [Type-providers and metaprogramming](kotlin_meta.pdf): Embedded domain-specific languages (DSLs) in Kotlin can be used to synthesize data and functions, but not types. Overcoming this limitation requires type providers: compile-time functions that synthesize classes, interfaces, mixins, and type aliases. Type providers enable DSLs like embedded `SQL`.
- [Declarative Kotlin](kotlin_declarative.pdf): Declarative programming is an approach striving to enable describing what you want to get rather than how to get it. It facilitates concise, transparent, straight-to-the-point code and is an indispensable tool for tackling inherent complexity. We outline how to introduce declarative programming capabilities into Kotlin bringing the full power of functional logic programming (roughly “Haskell + Prolog”).
- [Literate Kotlin](kotlin_literate.pdf): Kotlin in its current form is not fully suited for literate programming and lags behind Python when it comes to illustrating ideas in tutorials and research papers. We draft a Kotlin variant for literate programming and academic / educational use as ‘runnable pseudocode’. Literate Kotlin, as we currently call it, can be seen as an alternative front-end to the same underlying language.
- [Academic Kotlin](kotlin_academic.pdf): Modified Literate Kotlin can be used for computer science papers and in mathematics as a language for constructions and proofs. These applications require dedicated extensions, we'll outline in this memo. High abuse potential makes some of them undesirable for a general-purpose programming language, so we propose introducing a separate dialect: Academic Kotlin.
